README.md, before:

Welcome to the RA package!
===========================

Introduction
------------

RA is a simple file format for storing n-dimensional arrays. RA stands for **raw array**
and should be pronounced *arr-ay*, although it is not a coincidence that the
mispronounciation *rah* (as in "raw" in some dialects) also makes sense.

RA was designed to be portable, fast, and storage
efficient. For scientific applications in particular, it can allow the simple
storage of large arrays without a separate header file to store the
dimensions and type metadata. 

I believe the world doesn't need another hierarchical data container. We already have one of 
those---it's called a filesystem. What is needed is a simple one-to-one mapping of data structures to disk files that preserves metadata and is fast and simple to read and write.

In addition to int, uint, and float of arbitrary sizes, RA also supports

(1) **complex floats**: which other common formats, such as HDF5, don't have.

(2) **composite types**: RA handles reading and writing these, but the encoding and decoding of those is left to the user, since only they can know the structure of their `struct`. Decoding can be as simple as a typecast, however, for types of fixed size.

As an aside, the RA format is technically recursive (or fractal?!). You could store an array of RA files in a RA file if you want by defining the file as a composite type.

Format
-----------

The file format is a simple concatenation of a header array and a data array. The header is made up of at least seven 64-bit unsigned integers. The array data is whatever you want it to be. Optionally text or binary metadata can be appended to the end of the file with no harmful effects, but this data is not saved or written back out by the library. It is up to you to keep track of it.

### File Structure

| offset (bytes) | object | type           | meaning 
|----------------|--------|----------------|---------
|                |        |                | **HEADER**	
| 0              | magic  | UInt64         | magic number
| 8              | flags  | UInt64         | endianness, future options
| 16             | eltype | UInt64         | element type code
| 24             | elbyte | UInt64         | element size in bytes
| 32             | size   | UInt64         | data segment length in bytes
| 40             | ndims  | UInt64         | number of array dimensions
| 48             | dims   | Vector{UInt64} | array dimensions
| 48 + 8 x dims  | data   | Vector{UInt8}  | **ARRAY DATA**
| 48 + 8 x dims + size | - | -             | **VOLATILE METADATA**

### Elemental Type Specification

| code | type
| ---- | ----
| 0    | user-defined
| 1    | signed integer
| 2    | unsigned integer
| 3    | floating point (IEEE-754 standard)
| 4    | complex float (pairs of IEEE floats)

The width of these types is defined separately in the `elbyte` field. For example, 

* a 32-bit unsigned integer would be `eltype = 2`, `elbyte = 4`;
* a single-precision complex float (pairs of 32-bit floats) would be `eltype = 4`, `elbyte = 8`;
* a string would be `eltype = 2`, `elbyte = 1`, and `size` would contain the length of the string.

The user-defined structure

```
struct foo {
   char info[12];
   uint32_t index;
   double v[8];
}
``` 

contains a 12-byte string, a 4-byte int, and 8 8-byte floats, so the total size is 80 bytes. It would be coded as `eltype = 0`, `elbyte = 80`.

The data is written and read as the binary representation of the hardware you are on. Right now **little endian is assumed**, but big endian support can be added if there is interest.

File Introspection
------------------
To get a better handle on the format of an RA file, let's look inside one. If you are on a Unix system or have Cygwin installed on Windows, you can examine the contents of an RA file using command line tools.  For this section, we will use the `test.ra` file provided in the `julia/` subdirectory. 

First, let's pretend you don't know the dimensionality of the array. Then


```
> od -t uL -N 48 test.ra
0000000              8746397786917265778              0
0000020              4                                8
0000040              96                               2
0000060
                            
```

shows the dimension (2) as the second number on the third line. The command is extracting the first 48 bytes and formatting them as UInt64s. The ridiculous number listed first is the magic number indicating that this is an RA file. A slightly different command illuminates that:

```
> od -a -N 16 test.ra
0000000    r   a   w   a   r   r   a   y nul nul nul nul nul nul nul nul
0000020
```

Armed with the knowledge that the array is 2D, we know that the header is `48 + 2*8 = 64` bytes long. The command to skip the header and view only the data would be:

```
> od -j 64 -f test.ra
0000100     0.000000e+00            -inf    1.000000e+00   -1.000000e+00
0000120     2.000000e+00   -5.000000e-01    3.000000e+00   -3.333333e-01
0000140     4.000000e+00   -2.500000e-01    5.000000e+00   -2.000000e-01
0000160     6.000000e+00   -1.666667e-01    7.000000e+00   -1.428571e-01
0000200     8.000000e+00   -1.250000e-01    9.000000e+00   -1.111111e-01
0000220     1.000000e+01   -1.000000e-01    1.100000e+01   -9.090909e-02
0000240
```

Here we are using `-j` to skip the first 64 bytes and `-f` to format the byte data as single-precision floats. Note `od` doesn't understand complex numbers, but the complex data is stored as real and imaginary float pairs that are contiguous on disk. This means that each line of the output is showing two complex numbers with columns 1 and 3 the real parts and columns 2 and 4 the imaginary parts. Notice that it correctly renders the negative infinity.

Getting
-------

You can clone the git repository on your local machine if you have git installed using the command 

```
git clone https://github.com/davidssmith/ra.git
```

If you don't have git or don't want it, you can also download individual files through the website interface or the whole thing as a [zip archive](https://github.com/davidssmith/ra/archive/master.zip).

Usage
-----

### C

Only the C version needs to be compiled. Probably the easiest way to use that version is to drop the source files `ra.c` and `ra.h` into your project source directory, include the header file `ra.h`, and compile it along with your own project.  A makefile is also provided with which you can compile the demo and run it. You can also modify the Makefile to compile a shared library, if you so wish.

To run the demo, clone or download the git archive, navigate to the `ra/c` directory, and run `make`.  If the make fails, try to fix it for your particular compiler. I've provided a fairly generic one, though, so it should work on most systems. If the fix is not obvious, file an issue on the git repository, and I'll try to help.

If the make succeeds, you can run the demo with `./ra`.  If the tests pass, you'll see a message at the end to that effect. The output from the demo should look like this:

```
test data is 12 floats
0.000000+-infim
1.000000+-1.000000im
2.000000+-0.500000im
3.000000+-0.333333im
4.000000+-0.250000im
5.000000+-0.200000im
6.000000+-0.166667im
7.000000+-0.142857im
8.000000+-0.125000im
9.000000+-0.111111im
TESTS PASSED!
---
name: test.ra
endian: little
type: complex64
size: 96
dimension: 2
shape:
  - 3
  - 4
...
```

Notice that the output at the end is valid YAML markup. This was intentional.  The provided `ra_query()` function reads the RA file header and dumps the information as YAML for easy parsing.

### Julia

To use the Julia version, add the following lines to your Julia code:

```
include("ra.jl")
using RA
```

Now you can call `raread` and `rawrite` for Julia objects of type `Array{T,N}`.

A test file called `test.jl` has been included.  You can test the code on your machine at the command line by running `julia test.jl`. If the tests pass, you'll get a message saying so. The test output should look like this:

```
reading test.ra...
writing test2.ra...
reading test2.ra...
elapsed time: 0.32623855 seconds
querying ...
---
name: test.ra
endian: little
type: Complex{Float32}
size: 96
dimension: 2
shape:
  - 3
  - 4
...
---
name: test2.ra
endian: little
type: Complex{Float32}
size: 96
dimension: 2
shape:
  - 3
  - 4
...
PASSED
```

Notice the Julia version also contains a `raquery()` function that produces a YAML dump of the file header.

### Python

To run the Python version, put the `ra.py` file in your source directory and use `import ra` in your script. The demo file `test.py` should an example use case and should look like this when run:

```
> python test.py
[[  0.       -infj   1.-1.j           2.-0.5j          3.-0.33333334j]
 [  4.-0.25j         5.-0.2j          6.-0.16666667j   7.-0.14285715j]
 [  8.-0.125j        9.-0.11111111j  10.-0.1j         11.-0.09090909j]]
[[  0.       -infj   1.-1.j           2.-0.5j          3.-0.33333334j]
 [  4.-0.25j         5.-0.2j          6.-0.16666667j   7.-0.14285715j]
 [  8.-0.125j        9.-0.11111111j  10.-0.1j         11.-0.09090909j]]
---
name: ../data/test.ra
endian: little
type: complex64
size: 96
dimension: 2
shape:
  - 3
  - 4
...
---
name: test2.ra
endian: little
type: complex64
size: 96
dimension: 2
shape:
  - 3
  - 4
...
TEST PASSED
```

The only requirements for the Python version are that you have numpy installed. This has been tested on Python 2.7+ but not Python 3.

### Matlab

Drop the files `raread.m` and `rawrite.m` into your preferred directory in your Matlab path. Now you can call `array = raread(filename)` to return an array and `rawrite(array, filename)` to save an array to a file.

Checksums and Time Stamping
-----------------------------

A data checksum or time stamp was deliberately not included in the format because it is impossible to checksum a file with its checksum inside it.** Existing methods (e.g. tar) often zero out the checksum field and then checksum the rest of the file, but this requires special software that understands the format, so standard command line checksum tools won't work. Checksum verification is best left to external means, even if it requires a separate file. 

Time stamping is also not necessary, because file systems already provide that. Adding a time stamp that changes upon rewrite or access also foils checksum attemps. HDF5 files are very difficult to checksum for this reason.  It is our belief that the checksum should depend upon data properties only, not any chronology. Two files are identical if they contain identical data, no matter when they were created or accessed last.

To checksum an RA file, simple run your local checksum command. For example, in the main RA directory on a Mac, after you have run the C demo, you can issue:

```
> md5 julia/test.ra
MD5 (julia/test.ra) = 1dd9f98a0d57ec3c4d8ad50343bd20cd
> md5 c/test.ra
MD5 (c/test.ra) = 1dd9f98a0d57ec3c4d8ad50343bd20cd
```

On Linux, replace `md5` with `md5sum`. These two commands show that the provided `test.ra` is identical to the one produced by the C demo.

 ** Not technically impossible, but extremely difficult computationally.
 
Getting Help
------------

For help, file an issue on the [bug tracker](http://github.com/davidssmith/ra/issues) or email one of the authors.  Third party help is welcome and can be contributed through pull requests.

Authors
-------
David S. Smith [<david.smith@gmail.com>](mailto:david.smith@gmail.com)

Disclaimer
----------
This code comes with no warranty. Use at your own risk. If it breaks, let us know, and we'll try to help you fix it.

Commit message:

matlab optimizations; copyright notice added; README tweaks

README.md, after:

Welcome to the RA package!
===========================

Introduction
------------

RA is a simple file format for storing n-dimensional arrays. RA stands for **raw array**
and should be pronounced *arr-ay*, although it is not a coincidence that the
mispronounciation *rah* (as in "raw" in some dialects) also makes sense.

RA was designed to be portable, fast, and storage
efficient. For scientific applications in particular, it can allow the simple
storage of large arrays without a separate header file to store the
dimensions and type metadata. 

I believe the world doesn't need another hierarchical data container. We already have one of 
those---it's called a filesystem. What is needed is a simple one-to-one mapping of data structures to disk files that preserves metadata and is fast and simple to read and write.

In addition to int, uint, and float of arbitrary sizes, RA also supports

(1) **complex floats**: which other common formats, such as HDF5, don't have.

(2) **composite types**: RA handles reading and writing these, but the encoding and decoding of those is left to the user, since only they can know the structure of their `struct`. Decoding can be as simple as a typecast, however, for types of fixed size.

As an aside, the RA format is technically recursive (or fractal?!). You could store an array of RA files in a RA file if you want by defining the file as a composite type.

Format
-----------

The file format is a simple concatenation of a header array and a data array. The header is made up of at least seven 64-bit unsigned integers. The array data is whatever you want it to be. Optionally text or binary metadata can be appended to the end of the file with no harmful effects, but this data is not saved or written back out by the library. It is up to you to keep track of it.

### File Structure

| offset (bytes) | object | type           | meaning 
|----------------|--------|----------------|---------
|                |        |                | **HEADER**	
| 0              | magic  | UInt64         | magic number
| 8              | flags  | UInt64         | endianness, future options
| 16             | eltype | UInt64         | element type code
| 24             | elbyte | UInt64         | element size in bytes
| 32             | size   | UInt64         | data segment length in bytes
| 40             | ndims  | UInt64         | number of array dimensions
| 48             | dims   | Vector{UInt64} | array dimensions
| 48 + 8 x dims  | data   | Vector{UInt8}  | **ARRAY DATA**
| 48 + 8 x dims + size | - | -             | **VOLATILE METADATA**

### Elemental Type Specification

| code | type
| ---- | ----
| 0    | user-defined
| 1    | signed integer
| 2    | unsigned integer
| 3    | floating point (IEEE-754 standard)
| 4    | complex float (pairs of IEEE floats)

The width of these types is defined separately in the `elbyte` field. For example, 

* a 32-bit unsigned integer would be `eltype = 2`, `elbyte = 4`;
* a single-precision complex float (pairs of 32-bit floats) would be `eltype = 4`, `elbyte = 8`;
* a string would be `eltype = 2`, `elbyte = 1`, and `size` would contain the length of the string.

The user-defined structure

```
struct foo {
   char info[12];
   uint32_t index;
   double v[8];
}
``` 

contains a 12-byte string, a 4-byte int, and 8 8-byte floats, so the total size is 80 bytes. It would be coded as `eltype = 0`, `elbyte = 80`.

The data is written and read as the binary representation of the hardware you are on. Right now **little endian is assumed**, but big endian support can be added if there is interest.

### Memory Order

The RA format is **column major**, so the first dimension will be the fastest varying one in memory. This decision was made because the majority of scientific languages are traditionally column major, and although C is technically row major it is actually agnostic in applications where multi-dimensional arrays are accessed through computed linear indices (e.g. CUDA).  Of the supplied examples, all are column major except Python. In the case of Python, instead of reading the array into Python and reordering to non-optimal stride, we simply transpose the dimensions before writing and after reading. This means the array looks transposed in Python, but the same dimensions have the same strides in all languages. In other words, the last dimension of the array in Python will be the first one in Julia and Matlab.



File Introspection
------------------
To get a better handle on the format of an RA file, let's look inside one. If you are on a Unix system or have Cygwin installed on Windows, you can examine the contents of an RA file using command line tools.  For this section, we will use the `test.ra` file provided in the `julia/` subdirectory. 

First, let's pretend you don't know the dimensionality of the array. Then


```
> od -t uL -N 48 test.ra
0000000              8746397786917265778              0
0000020              4                                8
0000040              96                               2
0000060

```

shows the dimension (2) as the second number on the third line. The command is extracting the first 48 bytes and formatting them as UInt64s. The ridiculous number listed first is the magic number indicating that this is an RA file. A slightly different command illuminates that:

```
> od -a -N 16 test.ra
0000000    r   a   w   a   r   r   a   y nul nul nul nul nul nul nul nul
0000020
```

Armed with the knowledge that the array is 2D, we know that the header is `48 + 2*8 = 64` bytes long. The command to skip the header and view only the data would be:

```
> od -j 64 -f test.ra
0000100     0.000000e+00            -inf    1.000000e+00   -1.000000e+00
0000120     2.000000e+00   -5.000000e-01    3.000000e+00   -3.333333e-01
0000140     4.000000e+00   -2.500000e-01    5.000000e+00   -2.000000e-01
0000160     6.000000e+00   -1.666667e-01    7.000000e+00   -1.428571e-01
0000200     8.000000e+00   -1.250000e-01    9.000000e+00   -1.111111e-01
0000220     1.000000e+01   -1.000000e-01    1.100000e+01   -9.090909e-02
0000240
```

Here we are using `-j` to skip the first 64 bytes and `-f` to format the byte data as single-precision floats. Note `od` doesn't understand complex numbers, but the complex data is stored as real and imaginary float pairs that are contiguous on disk. This means that each line of the output is showing two complex numbers with columns 1 and 3 the real parts and columns 2 and 4 the imaginary parts. Notice that it correctly renders the negative infinity.

Getting
-------

You can clone the git repository on your local machine if you have git installed using the command 

```
git clone https://github.com/davidssmith/ra.git
```

If you don't have git or don't want it, you can also download individual files through the website interface or the whole thing as a [zip archive](https://github.com/davidssmith/ra/archive/master.zip).

Usage
-----

### C

Only the C version needs to be compiled. Probably the easiest way to use that version is to drop the source files `ra.c` and `ra.h` into your project source directory, include the header file `ra.h`, and compile it along with your own project.  A makefile is also provided with which you can compile the demo and run it. You can also modify the Makefile to compile a shared library, if you so wish.

To run the demo, clone or download the git archive, navigate to the `ra/c` directory, and run `make`.  If the make fails, try to fix it for your particular compiler. I've provided a fairly generic one, though, so it should work on most systems. If the fix is not obvious, file an issue on the git repository, and I'll try to help.

If the make succeeds, you can run the demo with `./ra`.  If the tests pass, you'll see a message at the end to that effect. The output from the demo should look like this:

```
test data is 12 floats
0.000000+-infim
1.000000+-1.000000im
2.000000+-0.500000im
3.000000+-0.333333im
4.000000+-0.250000im
5.000000+-0.200000im
6.000000+-0.166667im
7.000000+-0.142857im
8.000000+-0.125000im
9.000000+-0.111111im
TESTS PASSED!
---
name: test.ra
endian: little
type: complex64
size: 96
dimension: 2
shape:
  - 3
  - 4
...
```

Notice that the output at the end is valid YAML markup. This was intentional.  The provided `ra_query()` function reads the RA file header and dumps the information as YAML for easy parsing.

### Julia

To use the Julia version, add the following lines to your Julia code:

```
include("ra.jl")
using RA
```

Now you can call `raread` and `rawrite` for Julia objects of type `Array{T,N}`.

A test file called `test.jl` has been included.  You can test the code on your machine at the command line by running `julia test.jl`. If the tests pass, you'll get a message saying so. The test output should look like this:

```
reading test.ra...
writing test2.ra...
reading test2.ra...
elapsed time: 0.32623855 seconds
querying ...
---
name: test.ra
endian: little
type: Complex{Float32}
size: 96
dimension: 2
shape:
  - 3
  - 4
...
---
name: test2.ra
endian: little
type: Complex{Float32}
size: 96
dimension: 2
shape:
  - 3
  - 4
...
PASSED
```

Notice the Julia version also contains a `raquery()` function that produces a YAML dump of the file header.

### Python

To run the Python version, put the `ra.py` file in your source directory and use `import ra` in your script. The demo file `test.py` should an example use case and should look like this when run:

```
> python test.py
[[  0.       -infj   1.-1.j           2.-0.5j          3.-0.33333334j]
 [  4.-0.25j         5.-0.2j          6.-0.16666667j   7.-0.14285715j]
 [  8.-0.125j        9.-0.11111111j  10.-0.1j         11.-0.09090909j]]
[[  0.       -infj   1.-1.j           2.-0.5j          3.-0.33333334j]
 [  4.-0.25j         5.-0.2j          6.-0.16666667j   7.-0.14285715j]
 [  8.-0.125j        9.-0.11111111j  10.-0.1j         11.-0.09090909j]]
---
name: ../data/test.ra
endian: little
type: complex64
size: 96
dimension: 2
shape:
  - 3
  - 4
...
---
name: test2.ra
endian: little
type: complex64
size: 96
dimension: 2
shape:
  - 3
  - 4
...
TEST PASSED
```

The only requirements for the Python version are that you have numpy installed. This has been tested on Python 2.7+ but not Python 3.

### Matlab

Drop the files `raread.m` and `rawrite.m` into your preferred directory in your Matlab path. Now you can call `array = raread(filename)` to return an array and `rawrite(array, filename)` to save an array to a file.

Checksums and Time Stamping
-----------------------------

A data checksum or time stamp was deliberately not included in the format because it is impossible to checksum a file with its checksum inside it.** Existing methods (e.g. tar) often zero out the checksum field and then checksum the rest of the file, but this requires special software that understands the format, so standard command line checksum tools won't work. Checksum verification is best left to external means, even if it requires a separate file. 

Time stamping is also not necessary, because file systems already provide that. Adding a time stamp that changes upon rewrite or access also foils checksum attemps. HDF5 files are very difficult to checksum for this reason.  It is our belief that the checksum should depend upon data properties only, not any chronology. Two files are identical if they contain identical data, no matter when they were created or accessed last.

To checksum an RA file, simple run your local checksum command. For example, in the main RA directory on a Mac, after you have run the C demo, you can issue:

```
> md5 julia/test.ra
MD5 (julia/test.ra) = 1dd9f98a0d57ec3c4d8ad50343bd20cd
> md5 c/test.ra
MD5 (c/test.ra) = 1dd9f98a0d57ec3c4d8ad50343bd20cd
```

On Linux, replace `md5` with `md5sum`. These two commands show that the provided `test.ra` is identical to the one produced by the C demo.

 ** Not technically impossible, but extremely difficult computationally.
 
Getting Help
------------

For help, file an issue on the [bug tracker](http://github.com/davidssmith/ra/issues) or email one of the authors.  Third party help is welcome and can be contributed through pull requests.

Authors
-------
David S. Smith [<david.smith@gmail.com>](mailto:david.smith@gmail.com)

Disclaimer
----------
This code comes with no warranty. Use at your own risk. If it breaks, let us know, and we'll try to help you fix it.
